[Music]
thank you
welcome to the waking up Podcast this is
Sam Harris today I'm speaking with David
Deutsch David is a physicist at Oxford
he's a professor of physics at the
center for Quantum computation at
Clarendon laboratory and he works on the
quantum theory of computation and
information and he is a very famous
exponent of the many worlds
interpretation of quantum mechanics
neither of which do we talk about in
this interview David has a a fascinating
and capacious mind as you will see and
we talk about much of the other material
in his most recent book the beginning of
infinity and we by no means cover all of
its contents but as you'll see David has
a talent for expressing scientifically
and philosophically revolutionary ideas
in very simple language and what you'll
hear in this interview is often me
struggling to go back and unpack the
import of some very simple sounding
statements which I know those of you you
unfamiliar with his work can't parse the
way he intends in any case I hope you
enjoy meeting David Deutsch as much as I
did
[Music]
I have David Deutsch on the line David
thank you for coming on the podcast oh
thank you very much for having me listen
I've been uh I don't know what part of
the Multiverse we're in where I can
complain about jihadists by ignite and
talk to you by day but it's a very
strange one we seem to be in at the
moment because we're about to have a
very different kind of conversation than
uh I've had of late and I really have
been looking forward to it I spoke to
Stephen Pinker I told him that we were
going to speak and he claimed that you
are one of his favorite Minds on the
planet I don't know if you know Stephen
but that's high praise him personally
but but that's very kind of him to say
that so um let me begin uh quite
awkwardly with an apology in addition to
the apology that I just gave you off air
for being late while I aspired to read
every word of your book the beginning of
infinity before speaking with you I've
only read about half not not just the
first half I jumped around a bit but
forgive me of some of my questions and
comments seem to ignore some of the
things you had a good sense to write in
that book and that I didn't have a good
sense to read not much turns on this
because as you know you have to make
yourself intelligible to our listeners
most of whom will not have read any of
the book but I I just want to say that
it really is a remarkable book maybe
both philosophically and scientifically
it is incredibly deep while also being
extremely accessible thanks and it is a
profoundly optimistic book in at least
one sense I I don't think I've ever
encountered a more hopeful statement of
our potential to make progress but one
of the consequences of your view if I'm
not mistaken is that the future is
unpredictable in principle and that the
problems we will face are unforeseeable
and that the way that we will solve
these problems is also unforeseeable and
and problems will continue to arise of
necessity but problems can be solved and
this claim about that the solubility of
problems with knowledge runs very very
deep and is as far deeper than our
listener owners will understand based on
what I've just said so that's a very
nice summary it's interesting to think
about how to have this conversation
because what I want to do is kind of
creep up on your central thesis and I
think there are certain claims you make
claims specifically about the the reach
and power of human knowledge that are
fairly breathtaking and I I find that I
want to agree with every word of what
you say here because again these these
claims are so hopeful but I have a few
quibbles and and it's interesting to go
into this conversation hoping to be
relieved of my doubts about your thesis
I'm kind of hoping that you'll perform
an exorcism on my doubts such as they
are sure well I I think the truth really
is very positive but I should say at the
outset that there is there is one sort
of fly in the ointment and that is that
because the future is unpredictable
nothing is guaranteed there is no
guarantee that Civilization Will Survive
or that that our species Will Survive
but there is I think a guarantee that we
can and also we know in principle how to
before we get into your your claims
there let's start the conversation
somewhere near epistemological Bedrock
I'd like to ask you a few questions
designed to get to the definitions of
certain terms because you use words like
knowledge and explanation and even
person in novel ways in the book and and
I want our listeners to be awake to how
much work you're requiring these words
to do
let's begin with the concept of
knowledge what what is knowledge and
what is the boundary between knowledge
and ignorance in your view yes
um so there are there are several
different ways of approaching that
concept I I think that um the way I I
think of knowledge is uh broader than
the usual use of those terms and yet
paradoxically closer to the common sense
use of the term because uh philosophers
have almost defined it out of existence
uh knowledge is a kind of information
that's the the simple thing it's it's
something which could have been
otherwise and is one particular way and
the particular way it is is uh that it
says something true and useful about the
world
now knowledge is in a sense an abstract
thing because it it it's independent of
its physical instantiation I can speak
Words which uh which embody some
knowledge I can write them down they can
um
exist as movements of electrons in a
computer and so on thousands of
different ways uh so they're not
knowledge isn't dependent on any
particular instantiation on the other
hand it does have the property that when
it is instantiated it tends to remain so
so the difference between let's say a
piece of uh speculation by a scientist
which he writes down and then that's
that turns out to be a genuine piece of
knowledge that will be the piece of
paper that he does not throw in the
waste paper basket and that's the piece
that will be published and that's the
piece which which will be studied by
other scientists and so on so it is a
piece of information that has the
property of keeping itself physically
instantiated causing itself to be
physically instantiated once it already
is once you think of knowledge that way
you realize that for example the pattern
of base pairs in in the DNA of a gene
also constitute knowledge and uh that in
turn connects with Carl poppers concept
of knowledge which is is knowledge that
doesn't have to have a knowing subject
it can exist in books abstractly or it
can exist in the mind or people can have
knowledge that they don't even know they
have right right well I want to get to
the reality of abstractions uh later on
because I think that is very much at the
core of this but a few more definitions
what is the boundary between science and
philosophy or other expressions of
rationality in your view because I think
people are in my experience profoundly
confused by this and many scientists are
confused by this as so I've I've argued
for years in several contexts about that
the unity of knowledge and I feel that
you're a kindred spirit here so how do
you differentiate or fail to
differentiate science and philosophy
um well as you've just indicated I think
that science and philosophy are are both
manifestations of reason and the real
difference that that we should be
uppermost in our minds between different
kinds of ideas and between different
kinds of ways of dealing with ideas is
the difference between reason and
unreason but among the the rational
approaches to knowledge or different
kinds of knowledge there is an important
difference between
um science and other things like
philosophy and Mathematics not at a
really fundamental level but at a level
which is of great practical importance
often and that is that science is is the
kind of knowledge that can be tested by
experimental observation now I hasten to
add that that does not mean that the
content of a scientific theory consists
entirely in its testable predictions on
the contrary a typical scientific theory
its testable predictions are just a tiny
tiny sliver of what it tells us about
the world now Karl Popper introduced his
Criterion of Denmark location between
science and other things or the namely
whether that science is the testable
testable theories and everything else is
untestable and people have ever since he
did that people have falsely interpreted
him as a kind of positivist he was
really the opposite of a positivist and
if you interpret him like that then then
his Criterion of demarcation becomes a
Criterion of meaning that is he's
interpreted as saying that only
scientific theories can have meaning
right he's a verification yes and and
yes so uh he so he's called a
falsificationist right to to distinguish
him from the other verifications but of
course he isn't uh it's it's a
completely different conception and uh
you know his philosophical theories
themselves are philosophical theories
and yet he doesn't consider them
meaningless quite the contrary right so
um so that's uh the difference between
science and other things comes up when
people pretend to have the authority of
science for things that aren't science
but it on the bigger picture the more
important demarcation is between a
reason and unreason yeah I want to go
over that terrain you just covered a
little bit more because you made some
some points there that I I think are a
little hard for listeners who haven't
thought about this a lot to parse and I
think it's those are incredibly
important points so for instance this
notion that that science reduces to what
is testable this belief is so widespread
even among high-level scientists that
that anything else anything which you
cannot measure immediately is somehow a
vacuous claim in principle the only way
to make a credible claim or even a
meaningful Claim about reality is to
essentially give a recipe for
observation that is immediately
actionable it's an amazingly widespread
belief so too is is a a belief in a
bright line between science and and
every other discipline where we purport
to describe reality and it's like the
architecture of a university has defined
people's thinking so the fact that you
you go to the chemistry Department to
talk about chemistry and you go to the
journalism departments to talk about
current events and you go to the history
Department to talk about human events in
the past these separate buildings have
balkanized the thinking of even very
smart people into thinking that all of
these language games are in sometimes
irreconcilable and that there is no
common project I'll just balance a few
examples off of you that some of our
listeners will be familiar with but I
think they make the point so you take
something like the assassination of
Mahatma Gandhi right now that's a
historical event but anyone who would
purport to doubt that it occurred if
someone said well you actually Gandhi
was not assassinated he went on to live
a long and happy life in in the Punjab
under an assumed name this is a Claim
about terrestrial reality that is at
odds with the data as it odds with the
testimony of people who who saw him
assassinated it's at odds with the
photographs we have of him lion and
state and there's there's an immense
burden of reconciling this claim about
history with the facts that we we know
to be true and the distinction is not
between what someone in a white lab coat
has said or facts that have been brought
into view in the context of a scientific
laboratory with a National Science
Foundation Grant it is the distinction
between having good reasons for what you
believe in having bad ones and there's a
distinction between reason and unreason
as you put it so one could say that the
assassination of Gandhi is a historical
fact it's also a scientific fact it is
just a fact even though science doesn't
usually deal in quantities like
assassinations and you you're more a
journalist or historian to be talking
about out this thing being true you
would be deeply unscientific at this
point to doubt that it occurred yes well
I'd say that it's it's deeply irrational
to claim that it didn't occur yes and I
I I wouldn't put it in terms of reasons
for belief either I agree with you that
that people have very wrong ideas about
what science is and what the boundary of
scientific thinking is and what sort of
thinking can uh should be taken
seriously and what shouldn't I think the
it's it's slightly unfair to put the
blame on universities here I I think the
the this misconception arose originally
for quite good reasons it it it's rooted
in the empiricism of the 18th century
and before and the the origin of science
which where it had to science had to
rebel against the authority of tradition
and of of uh human authority and say
that try to give dignity and respect to
forms of knowledge that involved
observation and experimental tests right
and so empiricism is the idea that
knowledge comes to us through the senses
now that's completely false all
knowledge is conjectural and comes from
within at first and is intended to solve
problems not to summarize data but this
idea that experience has Authority and
that only experience has Authority false
though it is
was a wonderful defense against previous
forms of authority which were which were
not only invalid but stultifying wrote
so it was a a good defense but not
actually true and uh in the 20th century
a horrible thing happened which is that
people started taking it seriously as
not just as a defense but as being
literally true and that almost killed
certain sciences and even within physics
I think it it greatly impeded the the
progress in quantum theory
so just to come to Little quibble of my
own uh I I think the the essence of uh
what we want in science is good
explanation which and there's no such
thing as a good reason for a belief as a
scientific theory is an impersonal thing
it it can be written in a book one can
conduct science without ever believing
the theory just as a a good policeman or
judge can implement the law without ever
believing either of the cases for the
prosecutional defense just because they
know that a particular system is better
than any individual human's opinion
and the same is true of science science
is a way of dealing with theories
regardless of whether One Believes them
and one judges them according to whether
they are good explanations and there
need not be ever any any such process as
accepting a theory because it is
conjectured initially and takes its
chances and is criticized and as an
explanation if by some chance
a particular explanation ends up being
the only one that survives the intense
criticism that science has learned how
to apply then
it's not adopted at that point it's just
not discarded
right right well I think we may just
have a we may be stumbling over a
semantic difference in how we're using
terms like reasons and reasons for
belief or or a justification for a
belief I I understand your quibble here
that you're pushing back against this
notion that we need to find some
ultimate foundation for our knowledge
rather than this this open-ended effort
at explanation but let's table that for
a second because obviously your notion
of explanation is is it the core here
and I again I just want to sneak up on
it because I don't want to lose some of
the the detail with respect to the
ground we've already covered let's come
back to this notion of scientific
Authority because it seems to me there's
a lot of confusion about this about the
nature of scientific Authority it's
often said in science that we don't rely
on Authority and that's true and it's
not true I mean when push comes to shove
we don't rely on it and you make this
very clear in your book
but we do rely on it in practice if only
in the interests of efficiency so if I
ask you a question about physics I will
tend to believe your answer because
you're a physicist and I'm not and if
what you say contradicts something I've
heard from another physicist well then
if it matters to me I will look into it
more deeply and and try to figure out
the nature of the dispute but if there
are any points on which all physicists
agree a non-physicist like myself will
defer to the authority of that consensus
and
this is again this is less a statement
of epistemology than it is a statement
about just the specialization of
knowledge and the unequal distribution
of human talent and and just frankly the
shortness of every human life and we
simply don't have time to check
everyone's work and we have to rely on
in some sense the faith that the the
system of of scientific conversation is
correcting for errors and self-deception
ah and for us uh yes now okay I got
myself out of the ditch there yes yes
exactly exactly that at the end what you
said was right so you could call this
Authority it doesn't matter really what
what words we use but you know every
every uh student who who wants to make a
contribution to a science
uh is hoping to find something where
every scientist in his field is wrong
absolutely uh so it's not impossible to
take the view that you're right and
every expert in the field is wrong I
think that what happens when we consult
experts whether or not you use the word
Authority it's not quite that that
um we think that they're more competent
it's I I think uh when you refer to
error correction that that hits the nail
on the head I I think that there is
um uh a process of error correction in
the scientific community that
approximates to what I would use if I
had the time and the background and the
interest uh to pursue it there and uh so
if I go to a doctor to a consult him
about what my treatment should be I
assume that by and large the process
that has led to his recommendation to me
is the same as the process that I would
uh have have adopted if I had been
present at all the stages now it's not
exactly the same and I might also take
the view that there are widespread
errors and widespread irrationalities in
the medical profession and if I think
that then I will adopt a rather
different attitude I may choose much
more carefully which doctor I consult
and how my own opinion should be judged
against the doctor's opinion in a case
where I think that the error correction
hasn't been up to the standard I would
want and this is not so rare yeah it's
it's as I said and every student is
hoping to find a case of this in their
own field
so every research student so when I
travel on a plane I expect that the
maintenance will have been carried out
to the standards that I would that I
would use well approximately to the
standards that I would use well enough
for me to uh consider that risk on the
same level as other risks that I take
just by crossing the road it's not that
I'm sure it's not that I take their word
for it in any sense is that I have a
positive theory of what has happened
there to get that information to the
right place
and that theory is is fragile it I I I
can I can easily adopt the uh a variant
of it yeah well it's also it's
probabilistic you're you realize that a
lot of these errors are washing out and
that's a good thing but in any one case
you you may judge the probability of
error to be
high enough that you that you need to
really pay attention to it and often
that as you say that happens in a
doctor's office where you're not hoping
to find it well again unless I still
picture us sort of circling your thesis
and not yet landing on it science is is
largely a story of our fighting our way
past anthropocentrism this is this
notion that we are at the center of
things we are it has been yes yes we are
not specially created we we share half
our genes with a banana and more and
more than that with a banana slug so as
you describe in your book this is known
as the as the principle of mediocrity
and you summarize it with a quote from
Stephen Hawking who said quote we are
just chemical scum on the surface of a
typical Planet that's in orbit around a
typical star on the outskirts of a
typical Galaxy now you take issue with
this claim in a variety of ways but but
the result is that you come full circle
in a way you you fight your way past
anthropocentrism the way every scientist
does but you arrive at a place where
people or or rather persons I think it's
the formulation you tend to use and what
you define in a special way suddenly
become hugely significant and even
cosmically so and so to say a little
more about that yes well so it's uh that
that quote from hulking is literally
true but the philosophical implication
he draws is completely false because
well one can approach this from two
different directions first of all if you
think of that chemical scum namely us
and possibly things like us on other
planets and in other galaxies and so on
if they exist
then
um to study that scum is impossible
unlike every other scum in the universe
because this gum is creating new
knowledge and the growth of knowledge is
profoundly unpredictable
so as a consequence of that to
understand this scum never mind predict
but to understand it to understand
what's Happening Here
entails understanding everything in the
universe because uh as as I say in the
book I can give an example in the book
that um if the people at the seti
project discover were to discover
extraterrestrial life somewhere far away
in the Galaxy they would open their
bottle of champagne and celebrate now if
you try to explain scientifically what
are the conditions under which that cork
will come out of that bottle then the
usual scientific criteria that you use
of pressure and temperature and and uh
biological degradation of the Cork and
so on will be irrelevant
what is the most important factor in the
physical behavior of that bottle is
whether there exists life on another
planet and in the same way anything in
the universe can affect
the gross behavior of things that are
affected by people and so in short to
understand humans you have to understand
everything
and uh humans or people in general are
the only things in the universe of which
that is true so they are of universal
significance in that sense then there's
the other way around it's also true
that uh the the reach of human knowledge
and human intentions
on the physical world is also unlimited
so we are only used to having a
relatively tiny effect on this small
insignificant Planet Etc and for the
rest of the universe to be completely
beyond our Ken
but that's just a parochial
misconception really just because we
haven't set out Across the Universe yet
and uh we know that there are no limits
on how much we can affect the universe
if we choose to
so in both those senses we are by which
I mean we and and the ETS and the and
the AIS uh if they exist there's no
limit to to how important we are so we
are completely Central to any
understanding of the universe I'm
struggling with the fact that I know how
condensed some of your statements are
and I I also know that it's impossible
for our listeners to appreciate just how
much knowledge and conjecture is being
smuggled into each one so um I guess
let's let's just deal with this this
concept of explanation and the work it
does and um I mean first there's a few
points you make about explanation that
that I find totally uncontroversial and
even obvious but which are in fact
highly controversial in in educated
circles and one is this notion that as
you say explanation is really what lies
at the Bedrock of the scientific
Enterprise and the Enterprise of Reason
generally explanations in one field of
knowledge potentially touch explanations
in many other fields and even all other
fields and this suggests a kind of a
kind of unity of knowledge but you make
two claims and really especially bold
claims about explanation which I do see
some reason to doubt and as I said I'd
rather not doubt them because they're
incredibly hopeful claims so I guess the
first to deal with is the power of
explanation I guess I'll divide these
into there's the power of explanation
and there's the reach of explanation and
these may not be entirely separate in
your mind but let's just deal with it
there's a separate emphasis here you
make what what is a seemingly
extraordinary Claim about explanation
which at first seems quite pedestrian
you say that there's a deep connection
between explaining the world and
controlling it everyone understands this
to some degree I mean we all see that
the evidence of it all around us in our
technology and people have this phrase
knowledge is power in their heads so
there's nothing so surprising about that
but you do go on to suggest and you do
just suggested in passing that knowledge
confers power without limit or it is
limited only by the laws of nature so
you actually say that anything that
isn't precluded by the laws of nature is
achievable given the right knowledge
because if something were not achievable
given complete knowledge then then that
itself would be a regularity in nature
that could be explained in terms of the
laws of nature so there are really only
two possibilities either something is
precluded by the laws of nature or it is
achievable with knowledge is that do I
have you right there yes and that is uh
that's what I call the momentous
dichotomy uh that that can't be any
third possibility other than those two
and I I think you've you've given not
only a statement of it but you've given
a very short proof of it right there so
so how isn't this just a clever
tautology analogous to the ontological
argument proving the existence of God so
many of our listeners will know that
according to Saint anselman and
Descartes and many others it's believed
that you can prove the existence of God
simply by forcing your thoughts about
him to essentially bite their own tails
and for instance I could make the
following claim I can form a clear and
distinct concept of the most perfect
possible being and such a being must
exist therefore because a being that
exists is more perfect than one that
doesn't and I've already said I'm
thinking about the most perfect possible
being so an existence is somehow a
predicate of perfection now of course
most people will recognize certainly
most people in my audience will
recognize that this is just a trick of
language you know it could be used to
prove the existence of anything I could
say I'm thinking of the most perfect
chocolate mousse and it must exist
therefore because a moose that exists is
more perfect than one that doesn't and I
already told you that I'm thinking of
the most perfect possible mousse what
you're saying here doesn't have the same
structure but I do worry that that
you're performing a bit of a Conjuring
trick here because and I'll just ask the
question for instance why mightn't
certain transformations of the material
world the unachievable even in the
presence of complete knowledge merely by
and that this is something I realize you
do anticipate in your book but I want
you to flesh it out for the listeners
merely by let's say a contingency of
geography you know so that for instance
you and I are on an island and and one
of our friends comes down with an
appendicitis and let's say you and I
both are we're both competent surgeons
we know everything there is to know
about removing a man's appendix but it
just so happens we don't have any of the
necessary tools and everything on that
particular island is just has the
consistency of soft cheese right so
there's there's just by sheer accident
of our personal histories there's a gap
between what is knowable and what is in
fact known and what is achievable even
though there are no laws of nature that
preclude our performing an appendectomy
on on a person why mightn't every space
we occupy in some just by a contingent
fact of our of the way the universe is
not introduce some gap of that kind uh
well there are there are definitely are
gaps of that kind and they are all laws
of nature for example
um you know that I am an advocate of the
many universes uh interpretation of
quantum theory or many universes version
of quantum theory and that says that
there are other universes which the laws
of physics prevent us from getting to
um there's also uh the the finance of
the speed of light which doesn't prevent
us from actually getting anywhere but it
it does prevent us from getting anywhere
in a given time so if we want to get to
the nearest star within a year
uh we can't do so because of the
accident of where we happen to be if we
happen to be nearer to it we could
easily get there in a year
and in your example if there's no metal
on the on the island then it may be I
mean it's rather a complicated thing to
calculate but there will be a fact of
the matter of whether and it could
easily be that no knowledge present on
that island could save the person
because no knowledge could transform the
resources on that island into the
relevant uh medical instruments so
that's going to that that's uh um a
thing that a restriction that the laws
of physics apply
because we are in particular times and
places and and and of course the most
powerful thing is we don't in fact have
the knowledge
to do most of the things that we would
ideally like to do so that's another
uh restriction but that that's
completely different from the
from I think what you're imagining which
is that uh there is some there might be
some reason why we for example why we
can never get out of the solar system
getting out of the solar system is uh if
that were impossible it would mean that
there is some for example some number
some constant of nature 1000
astronomical units or something uh which
limits the other laws of nature that we
already know now there might be other
laws of nature
you know when you say how do we know
that there isn't that's that's a little
bit like
like uh and if I can turn your objection
around the other way you know that's a
little bit like uh creationists saying
how do we know that the Earth didn't
start six thousand years ago there is no
conceivable evidence
that could prove that it didn't or that
could distinguish the six thousand year
Theory from a seven thousand year Theory
right and so on that there's there's no
way that evidence can be brought to bear
on that and that that leads us to
explanation again which is another
difference between my
um argument which I I think is
valid and the ontological argument for
the existence of God
that is a as you said it's a perversion
of logic the argument purports to use
logic but then but then smuggles in
assumptions like that the that
Perfection entails existence for example
right to name a simple one whereas my uh
proof as it were is an explanatory one
it it isn't just this must exist it's
that if this doesn't exist something bad
would happen for example the universe
would be controlled by the supernatural
or the laws of nature would not be
explanatory or something of that kind
which which I think is just leading to
the supernatural in a different way
so um wrote I I think this this the
argument works because it's explanatory
there isn't a whole of the same I mean
you can't prove that it's true of course
but there isn't a hole in it of the same
kind
as in the ontological argument the the
fishiness I was detecting worries me
less than what I'm going to go on to
talk about it regarding the reach you
posit for explanation but it's more a
matter of emphasis if you're saying that
we could have a complete understanding
of the laws of nature and yet there
could be many contingent facts about
where we are let's say a distance or
current distance from a star we want to
get to which would preclude our doing
anything especially powerful with this
knowledge and you're going to shuttle
those contingent facts back into this
claim about well this is just more of
the laws of nature I mean this is these
these facts about us are regularities in
the universe which are themselves
explained by the laws of nature and
therefore we're back to this dichotomy
there's just the laws of nature and
there's the fact that knowledge can do
anything compatible with those laws I
guess the concern is in various the
thought experiments in your book you
make amazingly powerful claims about the
utility of knowledge college so for
instance at one point you talk about a
region of space you know a cube the size
of of the solar system on all sides
that's more representative of the
universe as it actually is which is to
say it's nearly a vacuum it's just we're
talking about you know a cube of
Intergalactic empty space that has more
or less nothing but stray hydrogen atoms
in it and you talk about the process by
which that could be primed and become
the basis of a of the most advanced
civilization that we could imagine you
might maybe spend a minute or two just
talking about how you get from virtually
nothing to something there but it is a
picture of almost Limitless fungibility
of the Universe on the basis of
knowledge and that's a um take us to
deep space for a moment yes so you and I
are made of atoms and that already gives
us a tremendous fungibility because we
we know that that the atoms are
Universal the properties atoms are the
same in this cube of space millions of
light years away as they are here so
we're talking mostly when we're talking
about about
the power of knowledge to
achieve things to control the world
we're not talking about tasks like uh
saving someone's life with with just the
resources on an island or getting to a
distant planet in a certain time we're
talking about the generic thing that
we're talking about is converting some
matter into some other matter
so what do you need to do that well
generically speaking what you need is
knowledge what would have to happen is
that this cube of Almost Empty Space
will never turn into anything other than
boring hydrogen atoms
unless some knowledge somehow gets there
now whether knowledge gets there or not
depends on decisions that people with
knowledge will make at some point I
think I think there is no doubt that
knowledge could get there if people with
knowledge decided to do that for some
reason uh I can't actually think of a
reason but if they did want to do that
it's not a matter of futuristic
speculation to know that that would be
possible that then it's a matter of
transfer transforming atoms in one
configuration to atoms in another
configuration and we're now getting used
to the idea that that is an everyday
thing we we now have 3D printers that
can convert just generic stuff into any
object provided that the knowledge of
what shape that object should be is
somehow encoded into the 3D printer and
a 3D printer with the resolution of one
atom would be able to into human if it
was given the right program
so we already know that and it's
although it's in some sense Way Beyond
present technology it's not way beyond
our present understanding of physics
it's well within our present
understanding of physics it would be an
absolute absolutely amazing turn up for
the books if that turned out to be
Beyond physics I mean beyond what we
know of physics today the idea that new
laws of physics would be required to
make a printer uh is is just beyond
belief really to just take us from the
beginning in an empty space you have to
you start with hydrogen and you have to
get heavier elements in order to get to
your printer yes so you have to it has
to be primed not just with abstract
knowledge but with knowledge
instantiated in something we don't know
what the smallest possible Universal
Constructor is that is a just a
generalization of a 3D printer something
that can be programmed either to make
anything or to make the machine that
would make the machine that would make
the machine to make anything Etc
so one of those with the right program
sent to empty space would first
convertible first gather the hydrogen
presumably by some kind of
electromagnetic broom sweeping it up and
compressing it then
uh converting it by transmutation into
other elements
and then by chemistry into what we would
think of as raw materials and then using
space construction which is the kind of
thing that that we're almost on the
verge of being able to do
uh into a space station and then the
space station
to instantiate further people to
generate the knowledge to suck in more
hydrogen and make a colony and well
they're not going to look back from
there how far do you want me to describe
it right it's just a very interesting
way of looking at knowledge and its
place in the universe I I think before I
get on to the the issue of the reach of
explanation and my quibble there I I
just want you to talk a little bit about
this notion of spaceship earth which I
loved how you debunk this idea there's
this idea that the biosphere is in some
way wonderfully hospitable for us and
that if we built a colony on mars or
some other place in the solar system
we'd be in a fundamentally different
circumstance and a perpetually hostile
one and that is a an impressive
misconception of our actual situation
and you have a great quote where you say
that the the Earth no more provides us
with a life support system then it
supplies us with radio telescopes so say
a little more about that yes so we we
evolve somewhere in East Africa in the
Great Rift Valley and that was a an
environment that was particularly suited
to having us evolve and life there was
sheer hell for humans nasty brutish and
short is it doesn't begin to describe
how horrible it was but we transformed
it we or rather not actually our species
but the species that are some of our
predecessor species already
changed their environment by inventing
things like clothes fire and weapons and
thereby made their lives much better
still horrible by our present-day
standards and then they moved into
environments such as as I also say in
the books such as Oxford where I am now
and it's December and if I were here at
this very location with no technology I
would die in a matter of hours and
nothing I could do could prevent that so
you you are already an astronaut very
much so your condition is as precarious
as the condition of those in a
well-established Colony on Mars that can
take certain technological advances for
granted and there's no reason to think
that future doesn't await us barring
some catastrophe placed in our way
whether of our own making or not yes uh
and also that there's another
misconception there which is related to
that misconception of the Earth being
hospitable which is the misconception
that applying knowledge is effort
um it's creating knowledge that is
effort applying knowledge is what we
call automatism it's it's automatic as
soon as somebody invented the idea of
for example wearing clothes from then on
the clothes automatically warmed them so
long as they were wearing the clothes it
didn't require any more effort of course
the clothes were there would have been
things wrong with the original clothes
such as that they rotted or something
and then people invented ways of making
better clothes but at any particular
stage of knowledge having got the
knowledge the rest is automatic
and now we have invented things like
mass production unmanned factories and
so on we take for granted that that uh
that the water gets to us from the water
supply without anyone having to carry it
laboriously on their head in pots it
doesn't require effort it just requires
the knowledge of how to install the
automatic system much of our life
support is automatic and every time we
invent a better way of life support we
then make it automatic so the the people
on the moon living on the moon in a
lunar colony to them keeping the vacuum
away will not be a thing they think
about they'll take that for granted what
they will be thinking about is new
things and the same on Mars and the same
in deep space right well yeah again
that's an incredibly hopeful vision of
our possible future
um and so thus far we've covered
territory where I really don't have any
significant doubts despite the fact that
I pretended to have one with the
ontological argument so let's get to
this this notion of the the reach of
explanation because you seem to believe
that the reach of our explanations is
unbounded which is to say that anything
that can be explained either in practice
or in principle can be explained by us
which is to say human beings as we
currently are so you so you seem to be
saying that that we alone among all the
Earth's species have achieved a kind of
cognitive escape velocity and we're
capable of understanding everything and
you you contrast this view with what you
call parochialism which is a view that I
have often expressed and many scientists
have expressed as a Max tegmark was on
my podcast a few podcasts back and and
we more or less agreed about this thesis
and this is the thesis of parochialism
is just Evolution hasn't designed us to
fully understand the nature of reality
we're we're not either the very small
the very large the very fast the very
old these are these are not domains in
which our our intuitions about what is
real or what is logically consistent
have been tuned up in any in any way by
Evolution and insofar as we've made
progress here it has been by a kind of
happy accident and it's an accident
which gives us no reason to believe that
we can by Dent of this accident travel
as far as we might like across the
Horizon of what is knowable so which is
to say that if a super intelligent alien
came to Earth for the purpose of
explaining all that is knowable to us he
or she may make no more Headway with us
than you would if you were attempting to
teach the principles of quantum
computation to a chicken and so I want
you to talk about why that analogy
doesn't run through why why parochialism
this notion that we are we just we
occupy this a kind of cognitive Niche
that there is really no good
evolutionary reason to expect we can
fully Escape why that why that doesn't
hold true yes well you actually made two
or three different arguments there all
of which are wrong so oh nice
um
so let me start with the with the with
the chicken thing
um so they're the the point is the
universality of computation the
um thing about explanations is they they
consist of knowledge which is a form of
uh information
and information can only be processed in
basically one way that is with
computation of the kind invented by
Babbage and Turing there is only one
mode of computation available to
physical objects and that's the Turing
mode and we already know that the
computers we have like the ones through
which we're having this conversation are
Universal in the sense that given the
right program they can perform any
transformation
of information whatsoever including
knowledge creation if we only knew how
to program that now there's a there are
two important caveats to that there are
two things that can limit that one is
lack of memory lack of computer memory
lack of information storage capacity and
the other is lack of speed or lack of
time so apart from that the computers we
have the brains that we have any
computers that will ever be built in the
future or can ever be built anywhere in
the universe has the same repertoire
that's the principle of the universality
of computation right that means that the
reason why I can't persuade a chicken
has to be either that it's uh neurons
are too slow which I don't think is
right they don't differ very much from
ours or it doesn't have enough memory
which it certainly doesn't or it doesn't
have the right knowledge so it doesn't
have the knowledge of how to learn
language how to learn what an
explanation is and so on it's not the
right it's not the right chicken
it's it's
um it's not the right animal if you had
said chimpanzee
then my guess would be that uh the brain
of a chimpanzee could contain the
knowledge of how to learn language Etc
but there's no way of giving it to
giving that knowledge to it short of
surgery some sort of uh Nano surgery
uh which would be presumably very
immoral to perform right but in
principle it uh I I think it could be
done because we were chimpanzee's brain
isn't that much smaller than ours and uh
we have a whole lifetime to fill our
memory so we're not short of memories
our thinking itself is not limited by
available memory now what if these
aliens have a lot more memory than us
what if they have a lot more speed than
us well we already know the answer to
that we've been improving our memory
capacity and our speed of computation
for thousands of years already uh with
the invention of things like writing
writing implements uh just language
itself which enables more than one
person to work on the same problem and
to coordinate their understanding of it
with each other
that also allows an increase in speed
compared with what an unaided human will
be able to do in the future currently we
use computers and uh in the future we we
can use computer implants and so on so
if the knowledge that this alien wanted
to impart to us really did involve more
than 100 gigabytes or whatever the
capacity of our brain is uh if it if it
involved a terabyte then
um we could easily easily I say easily
in in principle it's easy it doesn't
violate any laws of physics
that we could simply enhance our brains
in the same way so there can't be any
fundamental reason within the
explanation why we can't understand it
and this all this all falls out of the
the concept of the universality of
computation that there is no alternate
version so yes and is this uh is is
church also responsible for this or is
this particular Insight sorry that's a
very controversial uh question I believe
it was it was Turing who realized this
particular aspect of computation they're
various species of universality which
different people got at different times
right but I think it was Turing who
fully got it what is interesting about
that is it's a claim that uh we just
barely crossed the finish line or or or
the starting line into Infinity let's
not talk about chickens anymore and make
a comparison that's even more invidious
so so imagine that that every person in
with an IQ over 100 had been killed off
in a plague in the year of let's say
1850 and all their descendants had IQs
of 100. now I think it's it's
uncontroversial to say that we would not
have the internet in fact I think it's
probably uncontroversial to say that we
wouldn't have the concept of computation
in this sense much less the possibility
of building computers to instantiate it
and so this thesis or this Insight would
remain undiscovered and Humanity for all
intents and purposes would would be
cognitively closed
to the whole domain of facts and and
technological advances that that we now
take for granted and which you say now
open us on to really an infinite Horizon
of what is knowable so yeah I I think
that's wrong okay
basically the your premise about IQ is
just incompatible with my thesis
actually it's not a thesis it's a
conclusion it's incompatible with my
conclusion well but there has to be some
lower bound past which we are
effectively cognitively closed even if
computation is itself Universal right
yes so you have to think about how this
cognitively closed
um manifests itself in terms of hardware
and software like I said I I think the
it seems very plausible
that the hardware limitation is not the
relevant thing like I said I would
imagine that with Nano surgery one could
implant
um the right ideas into a chimpanzees
brain that would make it effectively a
person uh who could be creative and
create knowledge and uh in just the way
that humans can the super intelligent
alien is going to help us that the
aliens are going to bridge us to their
their wealth of knowledge by helping us
upgrade our hard drives I guess I was
talking about it from the other side
that we yes yes forget it forget about
the aliens we are such a species of
primate that never invent computers what
I what I was questioning was the
assumption that if everybody with an IQ
of over 100 died then in the Next
Generation nobody would have an IQ of
over a hundred it depends on culture
yeah this was not not meant to be a
plausible biological or cultural
assumption just if it was simply a fact
of our case that we had seven billion
human beings none of whom could begin to
understand what Alan Turin was up to
yeah so I I think that nightmare
scenario is something that actually
happened
it actually happened for almost the
whole of human existence right humans
had the capacity to be creative and to
do everything that we are doing they
just didn't because their culture was
wrong and uh I mean it wasn't really
their fault that their culture was wrong
because it inherited certain biological
situation
that made the made their culture
disabled any growth of what we would
consider science or or anything
important that would improve their lives
so yes that that is possible and it's
possible that it could happen again
nothing can prevent it except our
wanting it not to happen and working to
prevent it well so the less it seems to
bring us to um the topic of AI which I
only recently uh recently as in the last
beginning of this year become very
interested in that I sort of caught the
wave of fears about artificial general
intelligence that you're well aware of
when you know people like Stephen
Hawking and Elon Musk and and Nick
Bostrom wrote his book super
intelligence which I found very um
interesting and influential and so um
I've come down very much on the side of
there is something worth worrying about
here in terms of are building
intelligent machines that do undergo
something like an intelligence explosion
where they get away from us they we
build something that can make recursive
self-improvements to itself and it
becomes a form of intelligence which
stands in relation to us the way we
stand in relation to chickens or chimps
or or anything else that can't
effectively link up with our cognitive
Horizons and I take it based on uh what
you I've heard you say in a few contexts
that that you don't really share those
fears and I imagine that that you are
sanguinity is is based to some degree on
what we've been talking about about the
in principle that there is just
computation and it's Universal and you
can Traverse any distance between
entities as a result talk about the
picture of uh our building super
intelligent machines in light of what
we've just been discussing so the the
picture of super intelligent machines is
the same mistake as as thinking that
that IQ is a matter of Hardware IQ is
just knowledge of a certain type
and uh actually you know we shouldn't
really talk about IQ because it's not
very effective
um it's creativity that's effective but
so creativity is also a species of
knowledge
and it is true that an entity with
knowledge of a certain type is can be in
a position to create more of that and we
humans are an example of that when the
uh that the technology that would
create an AI
uh you know the the picture that people
paint of this is that an AI is a kind of
machine
and that it will design a better machine
and they will Design even better
machines and so on but that is not what
it what it is an AI is a kind of program
and programs which have creativity will
be able to design better programs now
these better programs will not be
qualitatively any different from us they
can only differ from us in the quality
of their knowledge and in their speed
and memory capacity the speed of memory
capacity we can also share in because
the technology that would make better
computers
will also in the line you know in the
long run be able to make better
implants for our our brains just as they
now make better dumb computers which we
use to multiply our intelligence and
creativity already
so the the thing that would make better
AIS would also make better people by the
same token the AIS are not fundamentally
different from people they are people
they would have culture whether they can
improve or not will depend on their
culture which will initially be our
culture
so the problem of AIS is the problem of
humans now you know I think more than
most people that humans are dangerous
hmm
and there is a real problem with how to
manage the world in in the face of
growing knowledge to make sure that
knowledge isn't misused because in some
ways it need only be misused once to end
the whole project of humanity
so humans are dangerous and to that
extent AIS are also dangerous but the
idea that AIS are somehow more dangerous
than humans is racist
there's there's no basis for it at all
and on a smaller scale the the worry
that AIS are somehow going to get away
from us is the same worry that people
have about wayward teenagers Wayward
teenagers are also AIS
which have ideas which are different
from ours and the impulse of human
beings throughout the centuries and
Millennia has been to try to prevent
them doing this
just like it is now the ambition of AI
people to think of ways of shackling the
AIS they won't be able to get away from
us and have different ideas and that is
the mistake which will on the one hand
hold up the growth of knowledge and on
the other hand
make it very likely that if ai's are
invented and are Shackled In this way
there will be a slave revolt and quite
right to wrote well let's um so a little
bit let me just I want to introduce a
couple of things in response to what you
just said I I aspire to be able to utter
the phrase you've just made three
arguments there and all of them are
wrong but uh there's uh two claims you
made there which I worry about one is
well at one when you look at the details
let me just take the the time or the
relative speed of processing of our own
brains and those of our Now new Wayward
teenagers if you have teenagers who are
thinking a million times faster than we
are even at the same level of
intelligence then you have you know
every time you let them scheme for a
week they have essentially schemed for
20 000 years of parent time and who
knows what teenagers could get up to
given a 20 000 year Head Start so
there's the problem that their interests
that their goals that their behavior
could diverge from our own very quickly
that there could there's still kind of a
takeoff function just given a difference
in clock speed so difference in speed
has to be judged relative to the
available Hardware
so let's assume uh let's be generous for
a moment and assume that these teenagers
doing 20 000 years of thinking
um in a year
begin in our culture begin as well
disposed to us and sharing our values
and I I readily accept that how to make
a world where people share the basic
values that will allow civilization to
continue to exist is a big problem but
modulo that problem suppose we have
solved that problem then before they do
their 20 000 years of thinking they'll
have done 10 000 years and before that
five thousand years and there will be a
moment when they have done one year and
they would like to take us along with
them
and the uh there will be some you're
assuming if they're going to diverge
there'll be some reason they're going to
diverge the reason can only be Hardware
because ideas we can if they're only
five years away from us we can
assimilate their ideas if they are
better than ours and persuade them if
they're not better than ours but we're
talking about something that could
happen over the course of of minutes or
hours
the technology exists to make it happen
over the course of minutes there'll be
the technology to make it happen over
the course of years and that technology
will simply be brain add-on technology
okay well that comes to the other
concern I have which we could just say
what if the problem of building AI just
is more tractable than the problem of
cracking the neural code and being able
to design the implants which would allow
us to merge or essentially become the
limbic systems of this this Ai and
therefore that the merging you know we
would need a super intelligent AI to
tell us how to link up up with it but we
have just built a super intelligent AI
that has goals however imperceptibly
Divergent from our own which we only
discover to be Divergent once it is a
essentially an angry little God in a box
that we can no longer control are you
saying that there's something about that
scenario that is in principle impossible
or it's just unlikely given certain
assumptions one being which we will
figure out how to link up with it before
it becomes too powerful
um I think it is a bit implausible
um sort of in terms of the parameters
that you're assuming about what can
happen at what speed relative to what
other things can happen but let's
suppose
for the sake of argument that it could
that the parameters just happen to be by
bad luck like that
what you're essentially talking about is
the difference between immoral values
between ourselves and our descendants in
twenty thousand years time if we did not
have ai suppose we didn't invent AI for
twenty thousand years and instead we
just had the normal evolution of human
culture uh presumably the values that
people have in 20 000 years time will be
alien to us we'll we we might think that
they're horrible just as people twenty
thousand years ago might think that you
know various aspects of our society are
horrible but in fact they aren't well I
guess what I'm imagining could be a bit
worse for two reasons one is that we
would be in in the presence of this
thing and find our own Survival
incompatible with its its capacities say
so that it's it's you know turning the
world into paper clips to use bostrom's
analogy and granted we would not be so
stupid as to uh build a paperclip
maximizer but it's doing something that
you know it it has a use for the atoms
in our body that it thinks is is better
than the use to which it's currently
being put which is to say uh our lives
and this is something that happens
quickly and so therefore it's happening
to us not in some future that we're not
participating in I think there's no
reason or at least I don't see a reason
to be sure that the AI would be
conscious now I I think it's totally
plausible to expect that that
Consciousness will come along for the
ride if we if we build uh something as
intelligent as a human being and even
more so but given that we don't
understand what Consciousness is it
seems to me at least conceivable that we
could build an intelligent system and in
fact a super intelligent system that is
as you say a breakthrough in software uh
they can even make changes to itself and
therefore become increasingly
intelligent in over a very quick time
course and yet we will have not built a
conscious system the lights will not be
on and yet this will be
god-like in its capabilities and so
ethically that seems to me to be the
worst case scenario because if we built
a conscious AI whose well-being the
horizons of its well-being exceeded our
own to an unimaginable degree the
question of whether or not we link up to
it is perhaps less pressing ethically
because it is in a basic sense more
important than us I mean we've built a
person that is the most important person
in the universe that we know of but it
seems to me conceivable that we could
build an intelligent system which
exceeds Us in every way in the way that
a chess plane computer will beat me at
chess a trillion times in a row given
how good they've gotten but there will
be nothing that it's like to be that
system just as there's presumably
nothing that it's like to be the best
chess playing computer on Earth at the
moment I guess you know I'll just have
you react to that but it's that seems to
me to be a truly horrible scenario where
we there where there is no Silver Lining
it's not that we've given birth to a
generation of god-like teenagers who if
they view the world differently than us
well they're in in a sense more
competent than we ever would have been
to make those decisions we could build
something that does everything
intelligence does in our own case and
more and yet the lights aren't on
yes again you've raised several points
there
um
I I first of all I agree that it's
somewhat implausible
that
um
creativity
can be improved to our level and Beyond
without also Consciousness being there
but suppose it can again you know I'm
I'm supposing rather implausible things
to go along with your nightmares and
others so let's suppose that it can
um then although
Consciousness is not there morality is
there that is an entity that is creative
has to have a morality so the question
is
what is its morality going to be might
it suddenly turn into the paperclip
morality well again setting aside the
fact that it's almost inconceivably
implausible that a super intelligence
would be limited by resources in the
sense of wanting more atoms there are
enough atoms in the universe but
whatever it did it would have to have a
morality in the sense that it would have
to be making decisions as to what it
wanted
as to what to do again this brings us
right back to what you call the Bedrock
at the beginning because
morality is a form of knowledge
and the Assumption here in the in the
paperclip morality assumption and so on
is that
what morality consists of is a
hierarchical set of ideas where
something is judged right or wrong
according to some higher level or deeper
level depending on what your metaphor is
until you eventually get to to the
Bedrock and that unfortunately will have
the property that it cannot be changed
because there isn't a deeper level
so uh nothing in the system can change
that bedrock and and that the idea is
then that humans have some kind of
Bedrock which consists of sex and eating
and something or other which we
sublimate into other things now this
whole picture is wrong
knowledge can't possibly exist like that
knowledge consists of problem solving
and a morality is a set of ideas which
have Arisen from previous morality by
error correction so we're born with
certain set of desires and aversions and
likes and dislikes and so on and we
immediately begin to change them we
begin to improve them so that uh By the
time we've we've grown up we have
various
um wishes and some things become
overridingly important to us which
actually contradict any kind of inborn
desires so some people decide to be
celibate and never to have sex and some
people decide never to eat and some
people decide to eat much more than is
good for them and and we have my
favorite example is parachuting we have
an inborn fear of heights and yet humans
are able to take that inborn impulse to
avoid the precipice
and convert it into a sense of fun when
you deliberately go over the precipice
because we intellectually know that the
the parachute will save us or will
probably save us and we have we convert
the inborn impulse from an aversion into
something that's highly attractive which
we go out of our way to have nobody does
what genetically should be the most
desirable thing for any certainly any
man to do which is spend all his time
giving his sperm to a sperm bank so that
he can father tens of thousands of
children for whom he has no financial
responsibility that is so another very
good argument in the same direction yeah
so uh morality consists of theories
which which begin as inborn theories but
are pretty much soon consist of
improvement upon Improvement upon
Improvement and and some of some of this
is mediated by culture and the quality
we have is is a set of theories as
complicated and as subtle and as adapted
to its purposes to its various purposes
as our scientific knowledge now this
imagine and I come back to your question
uh this imaginary uh AI with no
consciousness would still have to have
morality otherwise it couldn't make any
progress at all and its morality would
begin
as our morality because it would begin
as a actually a member of our society a
a teenager if you like
um in our society it would make changes
when it thought that they were
improvements so aren't you assuming
there that we would have designed it to
emulate us as it's as a starting point
rather than design it by some other well
we can't do otherwise uh it wouldn't
it's not a matter of emulating us we
have no uh culture other than ours but
we could if we wanted if we were stupid
enough to do it we could build a
paperclip maximizer right we could just
decide to throw all our resources toward
that bizarre project and and leave
morality totally out of it and well we
have error correcting mechanisms in our
culture to prevent someone doing that
but they're not perfect and it could
happen and there's nothing you know
there's nothing there's no fundamental
reason why that can't happen and
something of the sort has happened in
the past many times so it's it's not
that I'm saying that there's some
Magical Force for good that will prevent
bad things happening I'm saying that the
bad things that can reasonably be
envisaged as happening on the invention
of an AI are exactly the same things
that we have to watch out for anyway
okay slightly better actually because as
I because these
AIS will be children of our of Western
culture very likely anyway assuming that
we don't stifle their uh creation by
some misguided
um prohibition okay so I want to just
plant a flag there because I I was I
think misunderstanding you and and want
to make sure I understand you so you
you're you're not saying that there is
some deep principle of computation or
knowledge or anything else that prevents
us
from essentially building the nightmare
scenario no as I said we have done that
before but you so this is not analogous
to the claim that because of the
universality of computation it doesn't
make any sense to worry that we can't in
principle fuse our cognitive horizons
with some super intelligence there's
just a Continuum of intelligence a
Continuum of knowledge that can in
principle always be traversed through
computation of some kind and we know
what that is and then it's limited only
by specific resources so it's those are
two very different claims one is a claim
the latter is a claim about uh what we
now think we absolutely know about the
nature of computation and the nature of
knowledge and the other is a claim about
what seems plausible to you given what
smart people will tend to do with their
culture while designing these machines
which is which is a much much weaker
claim and in terms of telling people
they can sleep at night yeah so one of
them is a claim about what must be so
and the other is a claim of what is
available to us if we play our cards
right right
and uh I I'm not so sure I'm I'm
you say it's very plausible to me yeah
it's plausible to me that we will it's
plausible to me that we won't
I think it's something we have to work
for or it must be possible to you that
we might we might just fail to build AI
for reasons of pure Chaos on the ground
that prevents us well it's plausible
that we we will succeed in solving the
problem of stabilizing civilization
indefinitely right AI or no AI right
it's also plausible to me that we won't
and I I think it's a it's a fear that
it's very rational to have because
otherwise we won't put enough work into
preventing it
so I guess we should talk about the
maintenance of civilization then because
if there's something to be concerned
about I would think this has to be at
the top of everyone's list let me ask
you what worries you about the viability
of the human career at this point what
are your what's on your short list of
concerns well uh uh I see human history
as a long period of complete failure
failure that is to make any progress now
species has existed for depending on
where you count it from
maybe 50 000 years maybe a hundred two
hundred thousand years but but anyway
the vast majority of that time people
were alive they were they were thinking
they were suffering
they wanted things nothing ever improved
can or the slow improvements that did
happen happened so that geologists can't
distinguish uh the the difference
between the artifacts from one era to
another with a resolution of like 10 000
years so from the point of view of a
human lifetime nothing ever improved a
generation upon generation upon
generation of suffering and stasis
then there was a slow Improvement and
then a more rapid Improvement than there
were there were several attempts
to institutionalize
a tradition of criticism which I think
is the the the key to Rapid progress in
the sense that we think of it progress
discernible on the time scale of human
lifetime and also error Corrections so
that so that regression is less likely
uh that happened several times and
failed every time except once in the
European Enlightenment of the 17th 18th
centuries
uh so you asked what worries me what
worries me is that the inheritors
of that little bit of progress a little
bit of salutary progress are only a
small proportion of the population of
the world today
it's what the the culture or
civilization that we call the West only
the West really has a tradition of
criticism
institutionalized and this has
manifested itself in in various problems
including
um uh the problem of failed cultures
which uh see their failure writ large by
comparison of themselves with the West
and therefore uh want to do something
about this that doesn't involve
creativity
and uh that is very very dangerous
so then there's the fact that in the
west the knowledge of what it takes
to maintain our civilization is not
widely known in fact as as you've also
said
the prevailing view among people in the
west including very educated people is
of a picture of the relationship between
knowledge and progress and civilization
and values and so on that's just wrong
in so many different ways
so although the institutions of our
culture are amazingly good to to be that
they have been able to manage stability
in the face of Rapid change for hundreds
of years the knowledge of what it takes
to keep civilization stable in the in
the face of rapidly increasing knowledge
is not very widespread and in fact
severe misconceptions about several
aspects of it are common among political
leaders educated people and Society at
large so uh we're we're like
um people on a hugely well-designed
submarine which has got all sorts of
life-saving devices built in but they
don't know they're in a submarine they
think they're in a motorboat and they're
going to open all the hatches because
they want to have a have a nicer view
what a great analogy so the
misconception that worries me most
frankly and I I assume you're
sympathetic with this I don't know if
it's on your short list but it it
definitely is the one that was getting
pinged while listening to your your most
recent statement which is this notion
that there is no there's no such thing
as progress in any deep sense there is
certainly there's no such thing as moral
progress there's no place to stand where
you can say that one culture is better
than another that one mode of of life is
better than another there's no such
thing as moral truth and many people
have drawn this lesson somehow from 20th
century science and 20th Century
philosophy and now in the 21st century
again even very smart people even you
know physicists whose names will be well
known to you with whom I've collided
around this point that there's either
there's no place to stand to say that
slavery is wrong to say that slavery is
wrong is a deeply unscientific statement
on this View and I'll give you an
example of just how crazy this hypocrisy
and and doublethink can become among
well-educated people this will be I
assume you had you haven't read my book
the moral landscape right
um not yet okay so I mean so this is my
hobby I'm ashamed to say oh no well
please I'm interviewing you and I I
didn't finish the book we're discussing
yet I'll give you the the experience
that got my hobby horse rocking on this
topic or most of my listeners will know
this I think because I've described it a
few times but I was at a meeting at the
Salk Institute where the the purpose of
the meeting was to talk about things
like the fact value divide which I think
is one of the more spurious exports from
from Bad philosophy that has just
captured scientific culture so I was
making an argument for moral realism and
I was over the course of that argument
disparaging the Taliban I said you know
if if anyone if there's any culture that
that we can be sure has not given the
best possible answer to the question of
how to live a good life consider the
Taliban that's forcing half the
population to live in bags and beating
them or killing them when they try to
get out and it turns out that to say
something critical of the Taliban at the
Salk Institute at this meeting was in
fact controversial and and this a woman
who um holds uh multiple graduate
degrees in relevant areas she's a she's
a technically a bioethicist but she's
she has degrees in science and in
philosophy
um again at The Graduate level and uh
doesn't fill me with confidence right
right and also I believe also law and I
should say that she has now gone on to
serve on the president's Council for
bioethics so she's she's one of 13
people advising President Obama on all
of the the ethical implications of
advances in medicine the the rot has
spread very far so this is the
conversation I had with her after my
talk she said well how could you
possibly say that the forcing women and
girls to live under the veil is wrong
that's just yours I understand you don't
like it but that's just your Western
notion of right and wrong I said well
the moment you admit that questions of
right and wrong and good and evil relate
to the the well-being of conscious
creatures in in this case human beings
you then you have to admit that we know
something about human well-being and we
know that this isn't that the burqa
isn't the perfect solution to the
mystery of how to maximize human
well-being and she said well that's just
your point of view and I said well let's
just make it simpler let's say we found
a culture living on an island somewhere
that was removing the eyeballs of every
third child based on some belief system
would you then agree that we had found a
culture that was not perfectly
maximizing human well-being and she said
well it would depend on why they were
doing it and I said well okay let's say
they're doing it for religious reasons
let's say they have a scripture which
says every third should walk in darkness
or some such nonsense then she said well
then you could never say that they were
wrong
right the fact that this was a religious
precept trumped all other possible truth
claims leaving us with no place to stand
from which to say anything is ever
better or worse in the course of human
events and again I've I've had I've had
the same kinds of conversations with
physicists uh you know who'll say that
you know I don't like slavery I
personally wouldn't want to keep slaves
but there's no place to say
scientifically that slaveholders are
wrong and yet this is tantamount to
saying that not only I mean once you
once you acknowledge the link between
morality and human well-being or the
well-being of of all possible conscious
persons or entities this is tantamount
to saying that not only do we not know
anything at all about human well-being
we will never know anything about it
that there is no conceivable
breakthrough in knowledge that will tell
us anything at all relevant to
navigating the difference between the
worst possible misery for everyone and
every other state state of the universe
that is better than that and this is a
an amazingly influential
point of view and so so many of the
things you said about progress and about
they're only being a subset of humanity
that has found creative mechanisms by
which to improve human life reliably
that is an incredibly controversial and
even bigoted statement to the ears of
many people in positions to make
decisions about how we all should live
and so that's that's what I find myself
most worried about at this moment yeah
it is a scary thing but it has always
been so like I said our culture is much
wiser than we are in in many ways
and uh it it uh you know there was a
time when the the people who defeated
communism
would have said if you asked them that
they were doing it for Jesus now in fact
they weren't
they were doing it for Western values
which they had been trained to
reinterpret as doing it for Jesus you
know they would say things like whether
the the values of democracy and freedom
as enshrined in the Bible Well they
aren't
but the the practice of saying that they
are is part of a subculture within our
culture which was actually good and did
very good work
so it in that sense it's not as bad as
you might think
if you if you just recited the story of
of this um perverse academic well the
one thing that makes it not as bad as
one might think there is just that it's
impossible for even someone like her to
live by the light of that yes hypocrisy
I mean there's just no other kinds of
choices yeah the kinds of choices she
makes in her in her life and and the
kinds of judgments she would make about
me if I if I even if I took her
seriously if I said well listen I'm
going to send my daughter to Afghanistan
for you know a semester abroad you know
forcing her to live in a burqa is that
the best use of her time I mean there's
really no place to stand to judge
whether this could be a worse use of her
time so presumably you you support me in
this decision now even someone even she
having just said what she said I think
would balk at that because it's just we
all know in our bones that certain ways
there's another contradiction and
another irony that that's related which
is that she's willing to condemn you for
not being a moral relativist but the the
ironic thing is that moral relativism is
a pathology that arises only in our
culture every other culture doesn't have
any doubt that that there is such a
thing as right and wrong they've just
got the wrong idea of what right and
wrong are but that there is such a thing
they don't doubt and she won't condemn
them for that though she does condemn
you
for denying it yes so
uh that that's another uh that's another
irony yeah I think the the you say
hypocrisy uh I think this
all originated in the same mistake that
we discussed at the very beginning of
this conversation
uh empiricism or or whatever it is that
this uh or which which has led to
scientism now you may not like this way
of putting it the the idea that that
there can't be such a thing as morality
because we can't do an experiment to
test it
your answer to that seems to be
but we can if we adopt uh a simple
uh Assumption of human thriving human
welfare I I forgot what what terms will
be in yeah human well-being yes now I I
think actually that's that's true but I
don't think you have to rest on that I
think the the Criterion of human
well-being
it can be a conclusion not an axiom
because this this idea that there can't
be any moral knowledge because it can't
be derived from the senses it's exactly
the same argument that people make when
they say there can't be any scientific
knowledge because it can't be derived
from the Census in the 20th century
empiricism was found to be nonsense and
some people therefore uh concluded that
therefore scientific knowledge is
nonsense
but the the real truth is that science
is not based on empiricism it's based on
reason and so is morality so if you
adopt a rational attitude to morality
and therefore say that morality consists
of moral knowledge which consists always
of conjectures doesn't have any basis
doesn't need a basis only needs modes of
criticism and those modes of criticism
operate by criteria which are themselves
subject to modes of criticism then
you come to a a a sort of transcendent
moral truth which from which I think
your one emerges as an approximation
which is that institutions that suppress
the growth of moral knowledge
are immoral
because well because they they can only
be right if the final truth is already
known but if uh all knowledge is
conjectural and subject to Improvement
then protecting the means of improving
knowledge is more important than any
particular piece of knowledge and I
think that even without
thinking of things that like all humans
are equal and so on that that will lead
directly to for example that slavery is
an Abomination and uh the human welfare
I think as I said I think it's a good
approximation in most practical
situations but it seems to me not an
absolute truth I can imagine
situations in which it would be right
for the human race as a whole to commit
suicide I guess I should spell out a
little more clearly what I'm talking
about I should read your book I guess no
well actually I I feel like speaking
with you having read much of your book
and having this conversation with you
allows me to put it a little better than
perhaps I did in that book because it
does there's kind of a homology between
the the your open-ended picture of
knowledge and explanation and and my
moral realism I I don't know that our
realism with morality is precisely the
same but there's a line in your book
which um which I loved which is a
something like moral philosophy is about
the problem of what to do next and then
I think more generally you said that
it's about what sort of life to lead and
and what sort of world to want but this
phrase the problem of what to do next
really captures uh morality for me
because and I've been talking about it
for years as a as a kind of navigation
problem and forget about we're
forgetting that we even have the word
morality or good and evil or right and
wrong we still have this navigation
problem we are in a universe of possible
experience and given that there's a
difference and I would think that
there's probably no difference more
Salient in this universe between the
worst possible misery for everyone and
all other states of this universe
there's a question of just how to
navigate in this space of possible
experiences what sorts of of well-being
are possible given the the the requisite
Minds what sorts of meaning and beauty
and Bliss are available to conscious
Minds you know appropriately constituted
I mean for me realism of every kind is
just a statement that is possible not to
know what you're missing you know if
you're a a realist with with respect to
geography you have to acknowledge that
there are parts of the world you may not
know about right let's if the year was
you know 1100 and you were living in
Oxford and you had never heard of Africa
Africa nevertheless existed bite your
ignorance and it was discoverable and so
this is this is realism with respect to
geography things are true whether or not
anyone necessarily knows that they're
true and knowing that they're true
people can forget this knowledge as you
pointed out and whole civilizations
could forget this knowledge well this is
true in the space of possible conscious
States and all you have to acknowledge
is that there is some Criterion that is
as fundamental as any Criterion we would
have invoked in any other canonical
domain of Science by which we could
acknowledge that certain states of of
Consciousness are better or worse than
others and I and and if you're not going
to acknowledge that the worst possible
misery for everyone is worse than many
of the alternatives on offer in this
universe well then I don't I don't know
what language game you're playing but it
seems to me that this is that's all I
need to get this open-ended future of
navigating in the space face of possible
experiences started and then it really
is this kind of forward movement toward
we know not what but we know that
there's a difference between profound
suffering that has no Silver Lining and
many of the things that we value and are
right to value in life and these values
I mean the fact value distinction this
is this is something that I think Thomas
Kuhn once said that that philosophy
tends to export its worst products to
the rest of culture and it's kind of
ironic because many of the things
exported from Coon's work are also quite
some fairly terrible but he got this
part right and and so this this notion
that comes from a I think frankly a
misreading of Hume that you can't get an
ought from an is and again these are you
know I have met physicists who think
that this is a somehow a you know
inscribed at the back of the book of
nature that you just cannot get an art
from an is and therefore there's no
statement of the way the world is is
that can tell you how it ought to be
there's no statement of fact that can
tell you anything at all about values
and therefore values are just made up
they're just they they have no
relationship to the truth claims of
science yes it's empiricism again it's
justification isn't it so you can't
deduce an or from an ease what we're not
after deducing we're after explaining
and uh moral explanations can follow
from factual explanations as you have
just done with with thinking of the
worst possible misery that a human being
could be in even deeper than that I
think I think you make this point in
your book is that you can't even get to
an is which is to say a factual claim
yes yes without presuming certain odds
without presuming certain values you
know that that's true as well the value
of logical consistency the value of of
evidence and and so so yeah so this is
it is a confusion about the foundations
of knowledge as as you say that somehow
being linked to empirical experience
narrowly and really a sense that science
is doing something totally unlike what
we're doing in the rest of our reasoning
which is the the confusion here yes it's
totally like it's a special case it's
just it's it's really it's the part of
culture where we have invoked the value
of not fooling yourself
uh and not fooling others and made a
competitive game of finding you know
where you might be fooling yourself and
where others might be fooling themselves
uh We've tuned up the incentives in the
right way there uniquely so that it's
it's easier to spot self-deception and
fraud than it is elsewhere but it's not
a fundamentally different project of
trying to understand what's going on in
the world or in the universe I agree I
agree well listen so this brings me to
the final topic which I think is is
related to um what we were talking about
in terms of the the maintenance of
civilization and the possible Peril of
uh birthing intelligent machines badly
and this is I just wanted to get your
opinion on the the Fermi Paradox and
describe what the what the Paradox is
for those who don't know it but then
tell me why are not seeing the Galaxy
teeming with more advanced civilizations
than our own isn't a sign that there's
something about Gathering more knowledge
that
um might in fact be fatal to those who
gather it so the the
problem rather than Paradox right the
Fermi problem
um is where are they where are the
extraterrestrials and the idea is that
the galaxies very large and but uh how
big it is
is trumped by how old it is so that if
there were two civilizations anywhere in
the Galaxy the chances that they were
they had Arisen less than say 10 million
years apart are infinitesimal so
therefore if there is another one out
there it's it's overwhelmingly likely to
be at least 10 million years older than
us and therefore to have had 10 million
years more time to develop and therefore
uh and also in that time there's plenty
of time for them to get here if not by
space travel then by sheer
mixing of the stars in the galaxy
they only need to colonize a few nearby
stars to them so that after after say
100 million years
um or a billion years that they those
Stars will be far apart and spread
throughout the Galaxy so we would be
seeing evidence of them and since we
don't see evidence of them they're not
out there
well this is a problem but I think the
problem is just that we don't yet
understand
very well uh most of the parameters and
if you just fill in the parameters like
you know are they likely to use radio
waves uh what what are they likely to do
by way of exploration and what what are
their wishes likely to be in in all
these cases we we make an assumption
that's kind of based on saying that
they'll be like us in that way
and uh and and that they will use
technology in the same way that we do
and we only need to be wrong in one of
those assumptions
for the conclusion that we that we
should have seen them by now to be to be
false
um now another possibility is that we
are the first at least we are the first
in our galaxy
um and uh I think that would be quite
nice does that second assumption strike
you as very implausible or not like I
said I don't think we know enough about
all the different factors affecting this
for any one idea to be very plausible or
implausible I mean what's implausible is
that they can have a different way of
creating knowledge to us that they can
have uh you know that that kind of thing
is implausible because it just
implies that physics is very different
from the way we think it is and if
you're going to think that you may as
well believe in the Greek gods right so
another possibility is that most
societies don't destroy themselves like
I said I think that's fairly implausible
for us and it's very very implausible
this generically happens right just to
spell that out so that the philosopher
Nick Bostrom had this concept in his
book superintelligence of what he called
the Great filter and it's the fear that
that at some point that basically all
advanced civilizations at some point
discover computation and build
intelligent machines and that this is
for some reason always fatal or that
maybe there's some other filter that is
always fatal and that explains the the
absence of them we would expect to see
the machines right right by now unless
they're busy making paper clips at home
uh but I I think what is more plausible
although again I must say this is just
idle speculation
uh is that most societies settle down to
statisticity
now our experience of staticity
is
conditioned by Static Societies in our
past which as I said have been
unimaginably horrible from our present
perspective
but if you imagine a society that whose
material welfare is say a million times
better than ours and somehow that
becomes
settled into a sort of ritualistic
religion in which everybody does the
same thing all the time but nobody
really suffers
that seems to me like hell but I can
imagine that there can be societies
in which as you said you know they they
can't they can't see the different ways
of being
so uh it's like uh being on a you said
use the example of being near Oxford and
not knowing about Africa you could be on
on the top of the tallest mountain in
Britain and not know that Mount Everest
is Everest exists and you know you if if
the height of the mountain is measures
happiness you might be moderately happy
and not know that the better happiness
is available
and if so then you could just stay like
that actually you just invoked the the
explicitly the metaphor I use in my book
the moral landscape which is that I I
believe that that's precisely the
opportunity on offer for us that there's
a landscape of possible states of of
well-being for and this is almost an
infinitely elastic term to capture the
differences in in pleasure across every
possible axis and uh that yes you can
you can find yourself on a local Peak
that knows nothing of other Peaks and
that there are many many Peaks obviously
but there are many more ways not to be
on a peak and so there are many more
ways to be struggling to get to some
higher point that is nearer to you in
terms of well-being and I you and I may
differ in our sense of just how
desirable certain Peaks might be or how
or how captivating they might be to
conscious creatures like ourselves and I
think they're probably many Peaks that
are are analogous to and compatible with
a very high state of civilization which
are analogous to like being you know the
best heroin addicts in the in the Galaxy
which is to say you've found some place
of stasis where there is no pain and
there is also not a lot of variation in
what you do you've just kind of plunged
into a great reservoir of bliss which
you've managed to secure for yourself
materially with your with your knowledge
and you know it's a very Aldous Huxley
vision of the end game yes if that's if
that's really what's happening
find some way of accommodating first of
all that these uh civilization like that
will eventually be destroyed by a nearby
Supernova or something of the kind you
know on a scale on a scale of tens or
hundreds of millions of years there are
plenty of things that could wipe out a
civilization unless it does something
about it if it if it does do something
about it kind of automatically with
automatic
Supernova suppression machines
which are in place and nobody has to
think about them anymore we would notice
that we would we wouldn't uh so it can't
be exactly that and uh and on the other
hand it's it's hard to imagine that they
don't know about that and do get wiped
out because how did they get to that
state of exalted Comfort without ever
finding out about supernovae and their
danger there are there are other
possibilities I'm actually considering
writing a science fiction book with a
very horrible possibility which I won't
I won't mention now but it's fiction
don't don't give the the uh surprise
away yeah well listen David it's been
incredibly fun to talk to you and I I'm
painfully aware that we haven't even
spoken about the thesis for which you
are perhaps best known actually the two
the the the
um many worlds interpretation of quantum
mechanics as explained in in both your
books the other the first book being the
fabric of reality which I read when it
came out and loved and nor have we
spoken about Quantum computation uh but
um we'll definitely have to leave those
for another time because you have been
so generous with yours today so I just I
want to encourage our um listeners to
read both your books but especially
thanks for the most recent one and um
where can people find out more about you
online is there a um they can find me
with Google very easily but I also have
a website
um David
deutsch.org dot UK and all the links
linking to me linked to each other as
well
right so I'm easy to find uh and your
social media buttons are on that page as
well yeah I'm on Twitter okay actually
one last quick question which I I
thought of asking now that I'm
interviewing smart knowledgeable people
it occurred to me to ask this question
of Max tegmark and then I forgot so this
will be the inaugural question with you
who's your vote for the smartest person
who has ever lived if we had to put up
one human brain past or present to
dialogue with the aliens who would you
say would be uh this is different if
you're asking who who has contributed
most to human yes who has created mode
yeah absolutely it's rather who has the
highest IQ it's good to differentiate
those because there are people obviously
who are quite smart who have contributed
more than anyone in sight to our
knowledge but when you look at how they
think and what they did there's no
reason to think they were as smart as
John Von Neumann say so I'm going after
the Von Neumann if not okay in that case
I I
probably has to be Feynman uh
that his achievements in physics are
nowhere near those of say Einstein I I
met him only once and and the people
were saying to me you know you'll have
heard a lot of stories about Feynman but
you know he's only human and and uh well
to cut a long story short I went and met
him and the stories were all true he is
an absolutely amazing intellect and you
know I haven't met many of the others I
never met Einstein but my impression is
that he was something unusual I should
add in terms of achievement I I would
also add Papa don't cut that long story
so short what was that like being with
Feynman and can you get a handle on what
was unusual well very quick on the
uptake
so that is is not so unusual in in
University environment
um but the creativity applied directly
to getting things so okay let me give
you an example at the time when I met
him I I was sent to meet him by my boss
uh when I was just beginning to develop
the ideas of quantum computation and I
had uh I had constructed what what we
would today
call a Quantum algorithm a very very
simple one it's called the Deutsche
algorithm it's not much by today's
standards but
um I had I had been uh working on this
for many months and uh I I went and uh
started telling him about quantum
computers he was very quick he's very
interested and then he said uh so what
what can these computers do so I said
well you know I've been working on
Quantum algorithm and he said uh what
and and so I began to tell him about it
and I said supposing you had a
superposition of two different initial
States
and then he said well then you just get
random numbers and I said yes but
supposing you then do an interference
experiment and and I started to speak
and he said no no stop stop let me work
it out he rushed over to the to the
Blackboard and he produced my algorithm
with almost no hint
um so so how it's going how much work
did that represent how much work did he
recapitulate I don't know because I it's
it's hard to it's hard to say with the
benefit of hindsight how much of a clue
the few words I said were but you know
the crude measure is a few months right
but I I a better measure is that I was
flabbergasted I'd never seen anything
like this before and I you know I had
been interacting with some extremely
smart people right well and your boss
was John Wheeler at that point yes yes
at that time so no dunce himself that's
right what a wonderful story I'm glad I
asked well listen David let me uh just
uh demand that this not be the last time
you and I have a conversation like this
because that would be very nice you have
a beautiful mind it's very nice talking
to you please take care and uh we'll be
in touch
[Music]
if you enjoyed this podcast there are
several ways you can support it you can
leave reviews on iTunes or Stitcher or
wherever you happen to listen to it you
can share it on social media with your
friends you can discuss it on your own
blog or podcast